Golden Image Delivery and Update Pipeline Design Proposal (#99)
kubevirt/community: design-proposals/golden-image-delivery-and-update-pipeline.md

# Overview

> This design provides an approach for automating golden disk image importing and keeping golden disk images up-to-date. The design also outlines how to integrate with this automation across the KubeVirt ecosystem including install (HCO+SSP), the OCP UI, and Helm/OCP VM templates.

Author: Yep, no problem. I added a "terms" section to cover goldne images and golden image namespaces.

## Motivation
IAAS platforms (like AWS and GCP) provide root disk images for commonly used operating systems as well as continually providing updated versions of those images. By making commonly used disk images both automatically available and automatically up-to-date, this lowers the friction involved with using their platform.

> To close this usability gap between Iaas platforms and KubeVirt, the KubeVirt ecosystem should provide the tools necessary for supporting a similar pattern of disk image availability within the cluster.

Author: yup yup, fixed

## Goals

* Pipeline capable of importing and keeping golden images up-to-date
* Zero operational downtime during disk updates
* No mutating existing PVCs during the import/update flow
* Compatible with DataVolumes
* Compatible with Templates (meaning helm and ocp templates)
* Transitions seamlessly with PVC Volume Populators in the future

## Non Goals

* Not a pipeline for updating disks attached to existing VMs

## User Stories

* As a user creating VMs, I want commonly used operating system disk images to automatically be made available to me without requiring uploading and managing my own os boot disk images.
* As a user creating VMs from a template, I want to be able to stamp out a new VM from a template which will always use the latest operating system version available.

> * As a cluster admin managing VM images, I want the ability to automate sourcing in operating system disk image updates and make them available to users.

Author: added, thanks

## Repos

* **CDI**: Provides API (tentatively called a VolumeReference) to act as a mutable symbolic link to a PVC and adds VolumeReferences as a DataVolume source type. 
* **CDI**: Provides API (tentatively called VolumeImportPoller) to handle recurring polling/importing disk images as PVCs into a golden image namespace using the CDI import flows
* **SSP**: Manages setting up VolumeImportPollers objects with containerDisk image sources for commonly supported operating systems.
* **Common Templates**: Transitions to use CDI’s VolumeReferences as DataVolumeTemplate source which ensures templates always reference the most up-to-date operating system disk images.
* **HCO**: Pass in golden image container registries to ssp operator in order to setup automation import pipeline.
* **OCP UI**: Needs to ensure VolumeReference is linked properly to a PVC in order to determine whether boot source for template is available. 

# Design

> ![Golden Image Importer](golden-image-delivery-images/importer-design.png "Golden Image Importer Design")

Author: i'll try to get to this. This might come as a follow up. i need to investigate my tooling here a little more.

A **VolumeImportPoller** object results in its corresponding controller polling for updates to a container image on a recurring interval (every so many hours). When updates to a container image are detected, the VolumeImportPoller will automatically import the contents into a new PVC (using the standard CDI import flows) residing in a specific namespace with a unique name. The VolumeImportPoller may need to implement a PVC garbage collection policy for removing outdated PVCs after an expiration period has been exceeded.

> A **VolumeReference** object references an import/clone source for a PVC. Functionally, it is similar to the “source” field of a DataVolume. The VolumeReference’s source is mutable, which has the side effect of allowing the VolumeReference to act as a static link that will redirect to whatever source the link currently points to. In the future, the VolumeReference will act as a PVC Populator as well as a DataVolume source.

Author: > If the intention is to eventually have a resource that encapsulates all the current DataVolume sources

Initially, the VolumeReference abstaction would only be used for PVCs, however I think we want to leave it open for more sources than just PVCs.

For example, I could see someone creating a VolumeReference with a containerDisk or http endpoint as a source as well. That would be really useful for people who want to create a golden image namespace to hold all their images as VolumeReferences that users can source into their VM specs.

>  then I think we need a name other than VolumeReference. 

Is the term `VolumeReference` all that inaccurate though? The VolumeReference is pointing to data "somewhere" which can be imported into a persistent volume using CDI. So it's kind of a "reference" to a thing you can  import into a "volume"... hence  "VolumeReference"

Do you have another name that might be more accurate and serve us better long term?

> A **VolumeReference** object references an import/clone source for a PVC. Functionally, it is similar to the “source” field of a DataVolume. The VolumeReference’s source is mutable, which has the side effect of allowing the VolumeReference to act as a static link that will redirect to whatever source the link currently points to. In the future, the VolumeReference will act as a PVC Populator as well as a DataVolume source.

Reviewer: Maybe I am being pedantic but if this resource contains a url to import, it is not referring to a volume.  Maybe `ImageReference` applies to both cases?  Or `ImageSourceReference`?  My original thought was `DataVolumeSource`

> A **VolumeReference** object references an import/clone source for a PVC. Functionally, it is similar to the “source” field of a DataVolume. The VolumeReference’s source is mutable, which has the side effect of allowing the VolumeReference to act as a static link that will redirect to whatever source the link currently points to. In the future, the VolumeReference will act as a PVC Populator as well as a DataVolume source.

Author: Michael and I talked about this. We landed on using the term `DataSource` to replace what was previously called `VolumeReference`

> A **VolumeReference** object references an import/clone source for a PVC. Functionally, it is similar to the “source” field of a DataVolume. The VolumeReference’s source is mutable, which has the side effect of allowing the VolumeReference to act as a static link that will redirect to whatever source the link currently points to. In the future, the VolumeReference will act as a PVC Populator as well as a DataVolume source.

Reviewer 2: @davidvossel It seems `DataSource` is also a field name in [PersistentVolumeClaimSpec](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L459) and in CDI's [StorageSpec](https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/blob/main/pkg/apis/core/v1beta1/types.go#L101). Is it a non-issue or we better choose another name? `ContentSource` was suggested by @aglitke.

> A **VolumeReference** object references an import/clone source for a PVC. Functionally, it is similar to the “source” field of a DataVolume. The VolumeReference’s source is mutable, which has the side effect of allowing the VolumeReference to act as a static link that will redirect to whatever source the link currently points to. In the future, the VolumeReference will act as a PVC Populator as well as a DataVolume source.

Author: @arnongilboa @mhenriks @aglitke There's been a lot of back and forth about naming. Whether to call this object `VolumeReference` `VolumeSource`, `DataVolumeSource` `DataSource`, etc... 

The most recent iteration of this discussion landed on `DataSource`. It's fine if that needs to change, we just need to commit to something.

As far as DataSource being a field of the PVC Spec, it's unlikely this causes any reason for concern unless a PVC DataSource becomes it's own resource type. We'd still be technically okay due to the different group/version for the CDI DataSource though.

![SSP Disk Import Pipelines](golden-image-delivery-images/ssp-disk-import-pipelines.png "SSP Disk Import Pipelines")

## Common templates: VolumeReferences as DataVolume Source

The common templates shipped with SSP need to have their DataVolumeTemplate sections transition to using a VolumeReference as the source field rather than a PVC claim name. This allows the VolumeImportPoller to seamlessly update the underlying PVC the corresponding VolumeReference points to, which then ensures that the common templates are always using the most up-to-date disk images.

## HCO: Integration with SSP Operator

The HCO is responsible for setting VolumeImportPoller sources on the SSP operator’s CR. These volume sources are the locations used by the VolumeImportPollers to populate PVCs for the common templates.

## OCP UI: Integration with VolumeReferences

The UI currently detects if a template has a boot source by checking if the DataVolumeTemplate’s source PVC is present. The UI needs to now be capable of checking if a DataVolumeTemplate’s source VolumeReference has phase: linked as well in order to determine if a boot source is set.

## Scalability

> The only scaling concern is that the automated process has the potential to exhaust storage resources unless a PVC garbage collection mechanism is observed by the VolumeImportPoller.

Reviewer 3: High amounts of manually created VolumeImportPollers can also cause network and cpu load at the import intervals.
Especially for clusters that enable or upgrade to this feature it could cause an initial spike in utilization until every image has been fetched once.

## Update/Rollback Compatibility

> * SSP operator must make image pipelines an opt-in feature to ensure existing boot images are not overwritten. 

Reviewer 3: The VolumeImportPoller could have a pause field or only import once if the interval is set to null.
This way SSP and the templates could create them but the fetching would only happen once. When the user enables the autoupdate, it would just set an interval.
On the other hand this would not result in a that stable image in cases where the operator CR gets reinstalled.

Can the operator also just create the VolumeReferences and if the admin enables auto-update we just create the poller pointing to the respective ref?

Author: > Can the operator also just create the VolumeReferences and if the admin enables auto-update we just create the poller pointing to the respective ref?

I think the most straightforward approach is for SSP to create VolumeReferences by default that match whatever is used by the common templates. SSP will simply always do this no matter what.

When an admin opts-in to using auto delivery/update, SSP would be configured to create a VolumeImportPoller which can then adopt ownership of the corresponding VolumeReference. If the admin later opts-out of the feature, SSP can delete the VolumeImportPoller and orphan the VolumeReference (use the equivalent of cascade=false for deletion) which will leave the VolumeReference intact. 

I'll update the doc to talk about this.

* UI must be capable of detecting boot sources for DataVolumeTemplates with sources for both VolumeReferences and PVCs

## Implementation Phases

**Phase1** - CDI APIs
* VolumeReference API/controller
* VolumeImportPoller API/controller

**Phase2** - SSP + Common Templates
* Common Templates transition to VolumeReferences for DataVolumeTemplate source
* SSP Operator creates VolumeImportPollers for automatic PVC import

**Phase3** - HCO and UI
* HCO Team integrates with SSP Operator’s API for setting volume import sources
* UI Team transitions to detecting boot source using a linked VolumeReference rather than looking directly for a PVC of a specific name.

# API Examples
## VM + DataVolumeTemplate + VolumeReference as source

```yaml
apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: DataVolume
metadata:
   name: my-fedora-vm-image
spec:
   pvc:
     accessModes:
     - ReadWriteOnce
     resources:
       requests:
         storage: 2Gi
   source:
     volumeReference:
       name: fedora
       namespace: some-namespace
```

## VolumeImportPoller Example

> This example polls for image tags for the quay.io/kubevirt/fedora image and imports the latest image sorting tags based on semver. As new tags are introduced, the VolumeImportPoller will import them as new PVCs and automatically manage updating the corresponding VolumeReference.

Reviewer 3: I'd probably allow specifying a tag directly and always polling for the newes sha instead.
This way it's possible to specify the e.g. 4.8 tag and always have the newest 4.8 image (4.8.9...).

Author: > I'd probably allow specifying a tag directly and always polling for the newes sha instead.

Maybe that makes sense someday, but I don't think we're interested in using floating tags at the moment. In general, I'm not sure if we'd ever consider going into production with a floating tag either.

The primary concern with a SHA alone is that it's difficult to tie a SHA to an exact image version.  If someone said they're using centos8 with some SHA, i'd have no idea what version of centos 8 that is unless i downloaded and booted the image myself.  If someone said their using `centos8:3.2011` then I know exactly what's going on. 

The approach i've outlined here appears to align with the fedora automation [1] for publishing container disks. It posts the fedora:33 image once, then the fedora:34 image when it comes out, then the fedora:35 image in the future when that one comes out. There is no "fedora:latest" floating tag being used.

A similar thing would go for something like centos 8. I'd expect a centos 8 container image with tags representing the x.z versions. The most recent release would be `centos8:3.2011`. The importer would index all the tags for the centos8 image and then import the highest semver. 

1. https://github.com/kubevirt/common-templates/blob/6e64be41089a6de810627d972287b3bc42726100/dvtemplates/fedora_new_image.sh#L48

Reviewer 3: I was thinking if we'd want to offer avoiding major version upgrades, but makes a lot of sense this way. Thanks

* **source** specifies where to poll from
* **pollInterval** specifies how often to look for new imports 
* **garbageCollectOutdated** specifies whether old PVCs should be cleaned up after a new PVC is imported.

```yaml
apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: VolumeImportPoller
metadata:
   name: fedora-poller
spec:
   source:
     registry:
       url: docker://quay.io/kubevirt/fedora
    pollInterval: 12h

>     garbageCollectOutdated: true

Reviewer 3: We could either garbageCollect generally or specify something like keep X images, either by count or age.
Same as replica-sets stay around.
This way admins can easily roll back on images or users can hard-bind their vmis to versions if necessary (which would work anyways with garbage collection).

Author: > We could either garbageCollect generally or specify something like keep X images, either by count or age.

yeah, makes sense to me. Maybe we could make this a future iteration of the feature.  I'm not sure we'd need it right out of the gate. For me, It's unclear what those parameters should be at the moment (x images, by count, age, etc...). Maybe that deserves a focused discussion later on.

status:

>   managedVolumeReference:

Reviewer 3: status could hold a "lastImportedPVC" field
Also, should we be able to point VolumeImportPollers at references manually so we can create refs but maintain them manually and/or add a poller later if the admin/we want to?

Author: > status could hold a "lastImportedPVC" field

i like that. I'm adding it to the doc. 

> Also, should we be able to point VolumeImportPollers at references manually so we can create refs but maintain them manually and/or add a poller later if the admin/we want to?

yeah, i changed my thinking around this after you brought up the issue with how SSP should transition from opt-out to opt-in of this auto-update feature. I think the poller should be able to adopt ownership of existing VolumeReferences and that reference should be specified on teh poller's api.  I've updated the doc to reflect this.

      name: fedora
```

## VolumeReference Example

This example shows how a PVC is linked using the claimName field on the VolumeReference spec. The VolumeReference’s status section will indicate if the claimName is linked or dangling. 

The UI can use the phase field to determine if a boot source exists for a VolumeReference or not. 

* **Phase: linked** indicates that the the claimName is set and that the corresponding PVC exists and is populated
* **Phase: dangling** indicates that the claimName points to a non-existent PVC, meaning the underlying PVC has either been deleted or is not created yet. 

```yaml
apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: VolumeReference
metadata:
   name: fedora
spec:
    source:
        pvc:

>             namespace: somenamespace

Reviewer 3: As we have namespace here, but not in the poller.status, but also in the DV.
What is the overall namespace relationship?
From what I read so far it's:
- DV and PVC do not have to be in the same NS
- PVC and VolumeRef do not have to be in the same NS
- VolumeRef and VolumePoller have to be in the same NS

Is this correct, intended?

Author: > PVC and VolumeRef do not have to be in the same NS

Strictly speaking, the PVC and VolumeRef don't have to be in the same namespace. However, in practice they always will be when these pipelines are being used with the volume import poller. 

> Is this correct, intended?

Everything involved with the image pipeline is in the same Namespace:
-VolumePoller
-VolumeReference
-Imported golden image PVCs

A DataVolume in any namespace can then use a VolumeReference in the golden image namespace to import a PVC from the golden image namespace.

Reviewer 3: Just want to make sure we're consistent with where we allow to bridge namespaces.

            name: fedora-32-001
status:
    phase: linked
```

## SSP Operator CR Example

This example shows how the SSP operator could expose opting into automatic image delivery and updates for images associated with their common templates. 

> By default, the ssp operator would simply create dangling VolumeReferences to match the VolumeReferences used as DataVolumeTemplate sources in the common templates. Users would import their own disks which would automatically bind to the dangling VolumeReferences and make them linked to a PVC. This matches the behavior that exists today.

Reviewer 3: Can you describe how a user imported pvc would automatically bind to the dangling VolumeReference?
Would this be naming related or how would the user tell the VolumeReference to reference this new PVC (without manually patching it).

Author: >Can you describe how a user imported pvc would automatically bind to the dangling VolumeReference?
Would this be naming related or how would the user tell the VolumeReference to reference this new PVC (without manually patching it).

yeah, i improved my wording here a bit. It was slightly confusing. Take a look at the new `Transitioning the CommonTemplates to VolumeReferences` section I added as well. It aims to clarify this specific question

To summarize, the VolumeReference can point to a source PVC that doesn't exist yet, just like the DataVolumeTemplates section in the current common templates can. When a user imports a PVC that matches the source PVC in a dangling VolumeReference, then the VolumeReference automatically gets linked.

By specifying a VolumeImportPoller on the SSP CR, one can opt-in to having VolumeReferences automatically linked to imported PVCs and have that linkage update as new versions of the corresponding image are imported.

```yaml
apiVersion: ssp.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: SSP
metadata:
    name: ssp-cr
spec: 

>     commonTemplates:

Reviewer 3: This means SSP (or HCO) would have to default this based on the common-templates we ship and use those images for?

Author: >This means SSP (or HCO) would have to default this based on the common-templates we ship and use those images for? 

I don't know exactly how the HCO will want to expose this to the admin on their API yet, but the expectation is that when the auto os disk delivery/update feature is enabled at the HCO level, that the HCO knows how to craft VolumeImportPollers on the SSP CR that align with the VolumeReferences shipped in the common templates.

So if the HCO knows the admin wants fedora and centos8 golden images auto delivered and kept up-to-date, then the HCO sets a VolumeImportPollers on the SSP cr indicating both where the images should be sourced from (the container image) and what VolumeReference it pertains to. 

SSP can in turn validate that the VolumeImportPollers actually match VolumeReferences shipped in the common templates.

## Repos

* **CDI**: Provides API (tentatively called a VolumeReference) to act as a mutable symbolic link to a PVC and adds VolumeReferences as a DataVolume source type. 
* **CDI**: Provides API (tentatively called VolumeImportPoller) to handle recurring polling/importing disk images as PVCs into a golden image namespace using the CDI import flows
* **SSP**: Manages setting up VolumeImportPollers objects with containerDisk image sources for commonly supported operating systems.
* **Common Templates**: Transitions to use CDI’s VolumeReferences as DataVolumeTemplate source which ensures templates always reference the most up-to-date operating system disk images.
* **HCO**: Pass in golden image container registries to ssp operator in order to setup automation import pipeline.
* **OCP UI**: Needs to ensure VolumeReference is linked properly to a PVC in order to determine whether boot source for template is available. 

# Design

![Golden Image Importer](golden-image-delivery-images/importer-design.png "Golden Image Importer Design")

> A **VolumeImportPoller** object results in its corresponding controller polling for updates to a container image on a recurring interval (every so many hours). When updates to a container image are detected, the VolumeImportPoller will automatically import the contents into a new PVC (using the standard CDI import flows) residing in a specific namespace with a unique name. The VolumeImportPoller may need to implement a PVC garbage collection policy for removing outdated PVCs after an expiration period has been exceeded.

Reviewer: If this is only for polling/populating from registries I wonder if `registry` should be in the name?  And since this is something that happens on a schedule, I wonder if `cron` or `job` should be in the name.

Author: > If this is only for polling/populating from registries

just like VolumeReference, i'm unsure if i want to commit all in on this being a containerDisk thing. I'd like to leave it open for other import sources as well. I could see it making sense for http endpoints possibly in the future, which is why i structured the API for the poller to have a "source" field.

> And since this is something that happens on a schedule, I wonder if cron or job should be in the name.

I'm not opposed `VolumeImportCronJob`. There's already a precedence for the term `CronJob` in k8s, https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/cron-jobs/, so that's probably more accurate. I think i'd want to change the api to replace `pollInterval:` with a `schedule: ` field similar to what's in the CronJob object if we do this.

What do you think about changing the naming to `VolumeImportCronJob`?

Author: Michael and I talked about this. We're going to use the term `DataImportCron` in order to align with the new `DataSource` object

Reviewer 3: I'm good with the `Cron` name as long as we also support an interval syntax matching what people are used to for a cron.
`ImportPoller` seemed pretty accurate to me as that is exactly what the resource does, it polls the source for changes and imports them. That it does that regularly on a schedule is one way I could think about. I can also think of a /trigger endpoint in the future. I don't mind a different prefix.

Here's an example of how this works.

**Before Update:** If the common templates had a DataVolumeTemplate that looked like the following before VolumeReferences were introduced.
```yaml
dataVolumeTemplates:
- apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
  kind: DataVolume
  metadata:
    name: fedora
  spec:
    pvc:
      accessModes:
        - ReadWriteMany
      resources:
        requests:
          storage: 30Gi
    source:
      pvc:
        name: fedora
        namespace: golden-images
```

**After Update:** The common template would have a DataVolumeTemplate that looks like the following after the update
```yaml
dataVolumeTemplates:
- apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
  kind: DataVolume
  metadata:
    name: fedora
  spec:
    pvc:
      accessModes:
        - ReadWriteMany
      resources:
        requests:
          storage: 30Gi
    source:
      volumeReference:
        name: fedora
        namespace: golden-images

```

**After Update:** And the SSP Operator would create a VolumeReference that pointed to the old PVC location previously referenced before the update.
```yaml
apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: VolumeReference
metadata:
  name: fedora
spec:

>   source:

Reviewer: Do we need `source` and/or `pvc`?  Maybe `spec.source.namespace` or `spec.pvc.namespace`

Author: > Do we need source and/or pvc? Maybe spec.source.namespace or spec.pvc.namespace

if we want to leave the door open for multiple sources in the future, then i think we'd need it structured like this. If we can commit to only using VolumeReferences for PVCs, then source and pvc are irrelevant. 

This was designed from the perspective of keeping that door open to multiple sources.

Reviewer: Agree if supporting multiple sources

```yaml
apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: VolumeImportPoller
metadata:
  name: fedora-poller
  namespace: golden-images
spec:
  source:
    registry:
      url: docker://quay.io/kubevirt/fedora
  pollInterval: 12h
  garbageCollectOutdated: true
  managedVolumeReference: fedora
status:
  lastImportedPVC: quay.io/kubevirt/fedora:33
```

## VolumeReference Example

This example shows how a PVC is linked using the claimName field on the VolumeReference spec. The VolumeReference’s status section will indicate if the claimName is linked or dangling. 

The UI can use the phase field to determine if a boot source exists for a VolumeReference or not. 

* **Phase: linked** indicates that the the claimName is set and that the corresponding PVC exists and is populated
* **Phase: dangling** indicates that the claimName points to a non-existent PVC, meaning the underlying PVC has either been deleted or is not created yet. 

```yaml
apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: VolumeReference
metadata:
  name: fedora
spec:
  source:
    pvc:
      namespace: golden-images 
      name: fedora-32-001
status:

>   phase: linked

Reviewer: If there are only two possible values, maybe a bool like `readyToUse` in `VolumeSnapshots`?

Author: > If there are only two possible values, maybe a bool like readyToUse in VolumeSnapshots?

maybe we should avoid phase entirely, and use simply a `Ready` condition instead. That allows us to assign a reason to why the VolumeReference isn't bound... like `PVC doesn't exist`, or perhaps in the future `http endpoint inaccessible` or `unauthorized access`

wdyt?

Reviewer: Condition is good

* Golden Disk Image Namespace: A namespace that specifically exists to host golden disk image PVCs. VMs can use CDI to cross namespace clone PVCs from this golden disk image namespace anywhere else in the cluster.

## Goals

* Pipeline capable of importing and keeping golden images up-to-date
* Zero operational downtime during disk updates
* No mutating existing PVCs during the import/update flow
* Compatible with DataVolumes
* Compatible with Templates (meaning helm and ocp templates)
* Transitions seamlessly with PVC Volume Populators in the future

## Non Goals

* Not a pipeline for updating disks attached to existing VMs

## User Stories

* As a vendor/distributor of OS images, I would like the most fresh version of my OS to reach the KubeVirt clusters that want it.
* As a user creating VMs, I want commonly used operating system disk images to automatically be made available to me without requiring uploading and managing my own os boot disk images.
* As a user creating VMs from a template, I want to be able to stamp out a new VM from a template which will always use the latest operating system version available.

> * As a cluster admin managing VM images, I want the ability to automate sourcing in operating system disk image updates and make them available to users.

Reviewer 4: What about an alerting mechanism if there's a failure to import a new image?
Should there be an event on successful import?

Author: yep, good point.  I added some comments about monitoring and alerts to both the user stories and SSP operator responsibilities

## Update/Rollback Compatibility

### Transitioning the CommonTemplates to DataSources

SSP operator must make image pipelines an opt-in feature to ensure existing boot images are not overwritten.

To handle the default (non auto update/delivery) use case during update, the SSP operator will create corresponding DataSources for every DataSource referenced in the DataVolumeTemplate sections present in the deployed common templates. These default DataSources will point to a PVC name that matches the PVC name used before DataSources were introduced into the common templates.

Here's an example of how this works.

**Before Update:** If the common templates had a DataVolumeTemplate that looked like the following before DataSources were introduced.
```yaml
dataVolumeTemplates:
- apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
  kind: DataVolume
  metadata:
    name: fedora
  spec:
    pvc:
      accessModes:
        - ReadWriteMany
      resources:
        requests:
          storage: 30Gi
    source:
      pvc:
        name: fedora
        namespace: golden-images
```

> **After Update:** The common template would have a DataVolumeTemplate that looks like the following after the update

Reviewer 4: What about existing custom templates created from common templates? Should this change apply to these as well?

```yaml
dataVolumeTemplates:
- apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
  kind: DataVolume
  metadata:
    name: fedora
  spec:
    pvc:
      accessModes:
        - ReadWriteMany
      resources:
        requests:
          storage: 30Gi

>     dataSource:

Reviewer 3: The embedding makes sense on a technical side, but not for the user (i think).
Everything you said sounds right, but none of the information is visible on the api (by naming etc.) which makes it implicit knowledge of the storage team. Not even the docs mention anything of this (http://kubevirt.io/api-reference/v0.40.0/definitions.html#_v1alpha1_datavolumesource) and I'd prefer to make the api more expressive instead of confusing.

So if `source` currently contains sources and those are mostly embedded (what doesn't seem true for pvc as it's also a ref), I don't see a reason why we shouldn't be able to do `.spec.source.reference` which explicitly adds an option to reference a data source that is not embedded here or part of this explicit api.
This reference field could even be made to in the future replace the pvc field so any kind of reference we come up in the future can go there. But I'm not fixed on the name.

That would make the most sense to me and fit the documentation of the `source` field.

>     dataSource:

Reviewer 3: Another option I might be able to live with would be `.spec.sourceRef` as it's more in line with what is done in Kubernetes already and makes more sense as a replacement for the `source` field but referencing something else.
Just like a `secretRef`. But then again this is something I'd say is more and more discouraged from the K8s api side.

>     dataSource:

Reviewer: I addition to what was said by @davidvossel, the choice to add an additional field was also influenced by the recent addition of the `spec.storage` field to DataVolumes.  See here:  https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/blob/main/pkg/apis/core/v1beta1/types.go#L50

`spec.storage` basically has the same fields of `spec.pvc` but has fewer required fields and takes advantage of shared `StorageProfiles`:  https://github.com/kubevirt/containerized-data-importer/blob/main/pkg/apis/core/v1beta1/types.go#L319-L325

A user can specify `spec.storage` or `spec.pvc` based on their needs.  Similar to proposed `spec.dataSource` and `spec.source`.  `spec.storage` use `spec.dataSource` take advantage of shared configuration resources.

I do like the idea of changing the name of `spec.dataSource` to `spec.sourceRef` though.

>     dataSource:

Author: Per our discussion. i documented using sourceRef like this.
```
apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: DataVolume
metadata:
   name: my-fedora-vm-image
spec:
  pvc:
    accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
    resources:
      requests:
        storage: 2Gi
  sourceRef:
    kind: DataSource
    name: fedora
    namespace: golden-images
```

>     dataSource:

Reviewer 2: I agree with @davidvossel  and @mhenriks having separate fields `dataVolume.Spec.Source` and `dataVolume.Spec.SourceRef` better represents these are different ways to define a source - directly or by reference to exteral object pointing to the actual source. We will sure update the documentation to make it clear for users.

    resources:
      requests:
        storage: 2Gi
  dataSource:
    name: fedora
    namespace: golden-images 
```

## DataImportCron Example

This example polls for image tags for the quay.io/kubevirt/fedora image and imports the latest image sorting tags based on semver. As new tags are introduced, the DataImportCron will import them as new PVCs and automatically manage updating the corresponding DataSource.

* **source** specifies where to poll from
* **managedDataSource** specifies the name of the corresponding DataSource this cron will manage. The controller should create this DataSource if it doesn't exist, and adopt ownership of the DataSource if it does already exist.
* **schedule** specifies in cron format when and how often to look for new imports 
* **garbageCollectOutdated** specifies whether old PVCs should be cleaned up after a new PVC is imported.

```yaml
apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: DataImportCron
metadata:
  name: fedora-image-import-cron
  namespace: golden-images
spec:
  source:
    registry:
      url: docker://quay.io/kubevirt/fedora
  schedule: "0 */12 * * *"
  garbageCollectOutdated: true
  managedDataSource: fedora
status:

>   lastImportedPVC: quay.io/kubevirt/fedora:33

Reviewer 3: That status reflects the last image pulled? Or is it the name of the pvc?
If it's the PVC okay, but it probably should be a reference as well as the PVC could be in another NS right?

Reviewer 3: Also I'd like to see more in the status like "lastPoll: timestamp" and  "lastImport: timestamp"

Author: @kwiesmueller great point. I've added the timestamps as you propose as well as an example of how conditions can be used to indicate an issue has occurred during import.

```

## DataSource Example

This example shows how a DataSource uses a ready condition to indicate that the corresponding pvc exists and is populated. 

The UI can use the ready condition to determine if a boot source exists for a DataSource or not. 

```yaml
apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: DataSource
metadata:
  name: fedora
spec:
  source:
    pvc:
      namespace: golden-images 
      name: fedora-32-001
status:
  conditions:

>   - status: "True"

Reviewer: Wondering where this is set.  Probably have to have a dedicated controller just for keeping this in sync.  Shouldn't be a big deal though

Author: yep, that's what I was thinking. hopefully it's pretty trivial

    type: Ready

```

## SSP Operator CR Example

This example shows how the SSP operator could expose opting into automatic image delivery and updates for images associated with their common templates. 

By default, the ssp operator would simply create dangling DataSources to match the PVC sources used in the DataVolumeTemplates in the common templates. Users would import their own disks which would automatically bind to the dangling DataSources and make them linked (reflected by ready condition set to true) to a PVC. This matches the behavior that exists today.

By specifying a DataImportCron on the SSP CR, one can opt-in to having DataSources automatically linked to imported PVCs and have that linkage update as new versions of the corresponding image are imported.

```yaml
apiVersion: ssp.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: SSP
metadata:
  name: ssp-cr
spec: 
  DataImportCronTemplates:
  - metadata:
      name: fedora-image-cron
      namespace: golden-image-namespace
    spec:
      source:
        registry:
          url: docker://quay.io/kubevirt/fedora

>       managedDataSource: fedora

Reviewer 3: I wonder if that should also be a proper reference (namespace, name).
And having the word DataSource in the field explicitly locks us down on the relationship. So it could just be "manages" or "updates" but on the other hand it's less speaking :-/

Author: For now, i think the `managedDataSource` should be assumed to exist in the same namespace as the cron

## Repos

* **CDI**: Provides API (DataSource) to act as a mutable symbolic link to a PVC that can be referenced in a DataVolume. 
* **CDI**: Provides API (DataImportCron) to handle recurring polling/importing disk images as PVCs into a golden image namespace using the CDI import flows
* **SSP**: Manages setting up DataImportCrons objects with containerDisk image sources for commonly supported operating systems. Adds monitoring and alerting for pipeline failures.
* **Common Templates**: Transitions to use CDI’s DataSource as DataVolumeTemplate source which ensures templates always reference the most up-to-date operating system disk images.
* **HCO**: Pass in golden image container registries to ssp operator in order to setup automation import pipeline.
* **OCP UI**: Needs to ensure DataSource is linked properly to a PVC in order to determine whether the boot image for a common template is available. 

# Design

![Golden Image Importer](golden-image-delivery-images/importer-design.png "Golden Image Importer Design")

> A **DataImportCron** object results in its corresponding controller polling for updates to a container image on a recurring interval. When updates to a container image are detected, the DataImportCron will automatically import the contents into a new PVC (using the standard CDI import flows) residing in a specific namespace with a unique name. The DataImportCron may need to implement a PVC garbage collection policy for removing outdated PVCs after an expiration period has been exceeded.

Reviewer 5: Do we need an API on HCO to configure/tune the image garbage collector or golden image retention policy?

Author: To start with, i think it's reasonable for the HCO to not expose tunings related to image retention and stick with some sort of sane default behavor... something like garbage collecting all out dated images after a new disk is successfully imported. This will be something the hco can set internally on the ssp CR when defining the DataImportCrons

Maybe someday we'll need to expose retention polices on the HCO CR, but my opinion is that we can start out without it though.

Reviewer 3: Tbh. I expected that HCO will reuse/import the API structs exposed by SSP for this.
Just plain passthrough of the relevant options. The rest should be handled by defaults on the schema.

Author: > Tbh. I expected that HCO will reuse/import the API structs exposed by SSP for this. Just plain passthrough of the relevant options. The rest should be handled by defaults on the schema.

I don't want to get into defining how advanced HCO CR tunings will work here. It's not necessary for the initial MVP of this feature. Lets get some experience under our belts with this feature and then have a future discussion about what (if any) advanced tunings should be exposed on the HCO CR. 

To start with I'd like to see the HCO expose a simple API that only allows opting into automated disk image deliver/updates. The HCO bundle will need to be built with an understanding of what disk sources are available for this automated disk import/update feature and those details will likely live within the CSV.

When a user toggles the opt in tuning on the HCO CR, the HCO then configures the changes necessary on the SSP operator.

@tiraboschi Does this sound like a reasonable objective to you for the first iteration of this feature?

Reviewer 5: +1 from me on this

Author: I revised the `HCO: Integration with SSP Operator` header to reflect this.

The DataVolume object will add a new field capable of importing pvc content using a DataSource. 

![DataVolume DataSource Field](golden-image-delivery-images/volume-reference-source.png "DataVolume DataSource Field")

## SSP: Setup DataImportCrons for common templates

Since the SSP operator manages installing common templates, this operator should also be responsible for setting up the DataImportCrons used to automatically source the disk images into the cluster that the common templates use.

The location the DataImportCrons pull from will be configurable on the SSP operators Custom Resource.

![SSP Disk Import Pipelines](golden-image-delivery-images/ssp-disk-import-pipelines.png "SSP Disk Import Pipelines")

## Common templates: DataSources as DataVolume Source

The common templates shipped with SSP need to have their DataVolumeTemplate sections transition to using a DataSource rather than the inlined PVC source field. This allows the DataImportCron to seamlessly update the underlying PVC the corresponding DataSource points to, which then ensures that the common templates are always using the most up-to-date disk images.

## HCO: Integration with SSP Operator

> In order to leverage golden disk image auto delivery/updates at the HCO level, the HCO is responsible for configuring DataImportCrons on the SSP operator’s CR.

Reviewer 5: Do we have also to set initial defaults or opinionated values?
And if so, how can we deprecate/remove image set in the past on future releases (e.g. we configure something pointing to quay.io/kubevirt/centos8 now and in 2 years we want to remove it supporting only quay.io/kubevirt/centos9)?
What is supposed to happen to this defaults/opinionated values when running in disconnected environments?

Author: > And if so, how can we deprecate/remove image set in the past on future releases (e.g. we configure something pointing to quay.io/kubevirt/centos8 now and in 2 years we want to remove it supporting only quay.io/kubevirt/centos9)?

I think the expectation is that if we stop supporting automated updates for something like centos8, that the HCO removes the DataImportCron for centos8 on the SSP CR. That should result in the SSP operator deleting the cron object, but we can consider leaving the DataSource/PVC related to the last import in the cluster if we want. 

So automated updates would then be disabled for centos8, but the last boot image that was imported would remain available.

> What is supposed to happen to this defaults/opinionated values when running in disconnected environments?

It's possible this feature of auto delivery/updating boot images doesn't make sense for disconnected environments at all.

Author: > Do we have also to set initial defaults or opinionated values?

can you provide some more information on this? I'm not 100% sure what is being asked.

Reviewer 3: I think it makes sense for disconnected environments. We talked about this before, they would just point the cron to their internal registry instead and have to take care of pushing the containerDisks according to their own process.

Author: >I think it makes sense for disconnected environments. We talked about this before, they would just point the cron to their internal registry instead and have to take care of pushing the containerDisks according to their own process. 

who is `they`. For the MVP, no one has control over the cron job except the HCO. Someone could create their own cron's outside of HCO and SSP control, but it wouldn't be the crons that the admin opts into when enabling automated image delivery/update

@tiraboschi for the introduction of this initial feature, is it reasonable that we don't target disconnected environments?

Reviewer 5: Fine, let's specify it in the proposal as a reference for the future.

Author: alrighty, i updated the document and tried to briefly capture this in the `HCO Disconnected Environments` section.

For instance, if the HCO wants to develop a feature for automatically sourcing in fedora golden images into a PVC to be used by the SSP's common templates, then the HCO needs to configure the location where the fedora image is sourced from on the SSP CR. 

This document doesn't include within its scope how the HCO should expose enabling the image auto delivery/update mechanism on the HCO API or where the containerDisk images are sourced.

## OCP UI: Integration with DataSources

> The UI currently detects if a template has a boot source by checking if the DataVolumeTemplate’s source PVC is present. The UI needs to now be capable of checking if a DataVolumeTemplate’s DataSource has the a ready condition equal to 'true'.

Reviewer 6: Sorry for the late response, currently the only info we can show is PVC exist or not, but with this new mechanism, new data may interest the UI user.

Is "Ready" / "Not ready" the only information we want to propagate to the UI users ?
Do we want to expose dates of last poll ?
for exmplae:
"Ready" uploaded 365 days ago
Do we have other states ?
for example:
"Ready" and a new image is failing to upload?
"Ready" and a new image is currently uploading ?
Do we want to expose this states to the UI user ?

Author: > Is "Ready" / "Not ready" the only information we want to propagate to the UI users ?
Do we want to expose dates of last poll ?
for exmplae:
"Ready" uploaded 365 days ago
Do we have other states ?
for example:
"Ready" and a new image is failing to upload?
"Ready" and a new image is currently uploading ?
Do we want to expose this states to the UI user ?

I think initially the goal should be feature parity with how the PVC detection works. 

There is indeed some interesting new info that can be provided though. How would you feel about re-approaching some of this as a next iteration after the initial feature lands?

Reviewer 6: > as a next iteration

hmm, I think the requirement for the UI to show info about the `DataImportCron` status, will come up very soon.
I may be missing something, from what I understand, I can find the `DataSource` connected to my templates immediately, but when I want to fetch data from the  `DataImportCron` connected this `DataSource` I don't have a clear path.
In order for the UI to fetch data from the  `DataImportCron` that manages a `DataSource` we need some linkage field, `MnagedBy` ? , `Owner` ? to help the UI find the `DataImportCron` that owns this `DataSource` and fetch some nicer info about the image, WDYT ?

Author: Yep, we can use an owner reference for the linkage.

Reviewer 6: Sounds good to me, we should specify in the doc that `DataSource` should be owned by `DataImportCron` for the UI to be able to find them, it will also be a nice way to prevent two `DataImportCron` managing the same `DataSource`, or having orphan `DataSource` with no `DataImportCron`

Reviewer 3: Just to clarify:
At some point we defined that SSP will create DataSources that do not have a Cron managing them yet (if I remember correctly).
If a user toggles the autoUpdate feature we'll create or delete the crons respectively. Using ownerRef will cause the GC to cleanup the DataSources then (on deletion) which might not be intended. SSP can use a different deletionPropagationPolicy, but I'm not sure if this is enough.
What about the Cron setting it's reference into status when updating the import status/target pvc?

Also from the UI perspective I don't know if we need the full one-way relationship or if that's something the UI can build itself as it would probably have both resources loaded at some point. I probably should get more familiar with how the UI works at some point before assuming like this...

I don't remember if we discussed that validation should make sure there is only one Cron per Source, if yes we could also enforce the same name for both resources which would make some validation and also linking easier as we're forcing the same namespace anyways.

Reviewer 6: > Also from the UI perspective I don't know if we need the full one-way relationship:

The UI show a list of `Templates` and want to show for each `Template` data currently only available in the `DataImportCron` for example `ImportSuccessful` condition.

Templates List

Template Name | ImportSuccessful.status | ImportSuccessful.message
---------|-----------------|-------------
template-fedora | "False" | "Unable to reach docker://quay.io/kubevirt/fedora"

If we don't have a link between a `DataSource` and the `DataImportCron` that managed it, the search for the `DataImportCron` that has an `managedDataSource` with the same name, even optimized search (hashed), will slow down rendering of large tables.

btw/ ownership is not the only solution here a `menegedBy` status can also help here.

Author: > If a user toggles the autoUpdate feature we'll create or delete the crons respectively. 

Objects can have multiple owner references, but only one reference can have `controller: true` [1].  For example...

```
  ownerReferences:
   - apiVersion: kubevirt.io/madeup
     controller: true
     blockOwnerDeletion: false
     kind: MadeUp
     name: resourceA
     uid: e0c84798-986e-437e-835b-840da938e3f7
   - apiVersion: kubevirt.io/madeup
     controller: false
     blockOwnerDeletion: false
     kind: MadeUp
     name: resourceB
     uid: dc4caedd-bd0e-4af0-99ef-a146cfb19699
```

Both resourceA and resourceB have ownership of the object. It doesn't matter which one (resourceA or resourceB) gets deleted first, the owned object isn't going to get garbage collected until both owners are gone. 

So, both SSP CR and DataImportCron can set ownership references on a DataSource, but only the original creator of the DataSource should set the ownership reference with `controller: true`

Does this make sense? If so, I can capture this in the doc so we're sure we'll implement who can take the `controller:true` ref correctly.

1. https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/design-proposals/api-machinery/controller-ref.md#the-three-laws-of-controllers

Author: I updated the doc with what we discussed here regarding multiple owner references.

Reviewer 6: lgtm from the UI side

To handle the default (non auto update/delivery) use case during update, the SSP operator will create corresponding DataSources for every DataSource referenced in the DataVolumeTemplate sections present in the deployed common templates. These default DataSources will point to a PVC name that matches the PVC name used before DataSources were introduced into the common templates.

Here's an example of how this works.

**Before Update:** If the common templates had a DataVolumeTemplate that looked like the following before DataSources were introduced.
```yaml
dataVolumeTemplates:
- apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
  kind: DataVolume
  metadata:
    name: fedora
  spec:
    pvc:
      accessModes:
        - ReadWriteMany
      resources:
        requests:
          storage: 30Gi
    source:
      pvc:
        name: fedora
        namespace: golden-images
```

**After Update:** The common template would have a DataVolumeTemplate that looks like the following after the update
```yaml
dataVolumeTemplates:
- apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
  kind: DataVolume
  metadata:
    name: fedora
  spec:

>     pvc:

Author: oh nice, thanks for the pointer

* **source** specifies where to poll from
* **managedDataSource** specifies the name of the corresponding DataSource this cron will manage. The controller should create this DataSource if it doesn't exist, and adopt ownership of the DataSource if it does already exist.
* **schedule** specifies in cron format when and how often to look for new imports 
* **garbageCollectOutdated** specifies whether old PVCs should be cleaned up after a new PVC is imported.

On the status we have information pertaining to when the last imports occurred as well as conditions to indicate if the most recent import is successful or not.

* **conditions** Indicate if the most recent import is successful or failing

```yaml
apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: DataImportCron
metadata:
  name: fedora-image-import-cron
  namespace: golden-images
spec:
  source:
    registry:
      url: docker://quay.io/kubevirt/fedora
  schedule: "0 */12 * * *"
  garbageCollectOutdated: true
  managedDataSource: fedora
status:

>   lastImportedPVC: fedora-v33

Reviewer 2: For what reason would you like to have it? monitoring? rollback?

>   lastImportedPVC: fedora-v33

Author: it's possible we may need to keep that list on the status as a form of book keeping for the controller than manages the cron jobs. 

We don't necessarily have to decide on that entirely here. I think there's some liberty to be taken during the implementation to decide exactly what makes the most sense.

  lastExecutionTimestamp: "01:01:01"
  lastImport: "01:01:01"
  conditions:
  - status: "False"
    message: "Unable to reach docker://quay.io/kubevirt/fedora"

>     type: ImportSuccessful

Author: I think the attributes of being "up-to-date" or "importing" are specific to the cron job, and probably don't make sense outside of that. To break it down a bit. i see revising the design doc with the following conditions.

DataSource probably just needs a ready=true|false  condition as it is now.
DataImportCron might want something like a progressing (import in progress), upToDate (at rest and up to date), conditions. 

The two DataImportCron conditions  (progressing, upToDate) should be able to represent most of what we care about.

>     type: ImportSuccessful

Reviewer 2: so upToDate replaces the above ImportSuccessful?

>     type: ImportSuccessful

Author: > so upToDate replaces the above ImportSuccessful?

yes, to me "UpToDate" indicates that the last cron executed successfully and any new imports have occurred. If there's a problem either polling or importing, then UpToDate would be false with a message indicating why

>     type: ImportSuccessful

Author: i updated the doc to reflect the UpToDate and Progressing conditions

```

## DataSource Example

This example shows how a DataSource uses a ready condition to indicate that the corresponding pvc exists and is populated. 

The UI can use the ready condition to determine if a boot source exists for a DataSource or not. 

```yaml
apiVersion: cdi.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: DataSource
metadata:
  name: fedora
spec:
  source:
    pvc:
      namespace: golden-images 
      name: fedora-32-001
status:
  conditions:
  - status: "True"

>     type: Ready

Author: I don't think a DataSource can have an empty source, but it can point to a non-existent source.

For example, a Pod can be posted with a spec that requests attaching a PVC that doesn't exist. Once the PVC is available, the pod will get scheduled.

I see the same thing for the DataSource object, it could technically point to a PVC or DataVolume as a source, but there's no guarantee that source exists. In the event that the source does not exist, the `Ready` condition will be `false` with a message indicating it's waiting on the source to be accessible within the cluster.

* Transitions seamlessly with PVC Volume Populators in the future

## Non Goals

* Not a pipeline for updating disks attached to existing VMs

## User Stories

* As a vendor/distributor of OS images, I would like the most fresh version of my OS to reach the KubeVirt clusters that want it.
* As a user creating VMs, I want commonly used operating system disk images to automatically be made available to me without requiring uploading and managing my own os boot disk images.
* As a user creating VMs from a template, I want to be able to stamp out a new VM from a template which will always use the latest operating system version available.
* As a cluster admin managing VM images, I want the ability to automate sourcing in operating system disk image updates and make them available to users. This should come complete with monitoring and alerts to notify me if the automation fails.

## Repos

* **CDI**: Provides API (DataSource) to act as a mutable symbolic link to a PVC that can be referenced in a DataVolume. 
* **CDI**: Provides API (DataImportCron) to handle recurring polling/importing disk images as PVCs into a golden image namespace using the CDI import flows

> * **SSP**: Manages setting up DataImportCrons objects with containerDisk image sources for commonly supported operating systems. Adds monitoring and alerting for pipeline failures.

Reviewer 3: A bit late to the party, we just discussed this in our call as it slipped.
Can we clarify this a little?
I don't think SSP should add monitoring for APIs it does not provide.
So the only monitoring I'd see right now is CDI exporting metrics regarding failed imports and import duration etc. and for those there could/should be alerts.

I'm not sure what SSP should monitor regarding this.

Author: i think CDI should be providing the metrics for the DataImportCron and DataSource. ssp might want to register an alert to trigger if one of their managed DataImportCrons for the common templates is continually failing.

Reviewer 3: Okay, that makes sense.
Thanks!

The location the DataImportCrons pull from will be configurable on the SSP operators Custom Resource.

![SSP Disk Import Pipelines](golden-image-delivery-images/ssp-disk-import-pipelines.png "SSP Disk Import Pipelines")

## Common templates: DataSources as DataVolume Source

The common templates shipped with SSP need to have their DataVolumeTemplate sections transition to using a DataSource rather than the inlined PVC source field. This allows the DataImportCron to seamlessly update the underlying PVC the corresponding DataSource points to, which then ensures that the common templates are always using the most up-to-date disk images.

## HCO: Integration with SSP Operator

During installation, the HCO bundle's CSV will pass into the HCO operator (as ENV VARs) locations where disk images are sourced from for the automated disk image delivery/update feature. The end user can opt-in to automatic delivery/updates of these image sources through a tuning on the HCO's CR. From there the HCO is responsible for configuring DataImportCrons on the SSP operator's CR.

> This document doesn't include within it's scope how the HCO should expose this feature to the end user. The general expectation is that we will start with a simple tuning that enables toggling automated delivery/updates on and then consider advanced tunings in future releases. The exact structure of where this tuning belongs on the HCO API is left up to the HCO community.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
This document doesn't include within its scope how the HCO should expose this feature to the end user. The general expectation is that we will start with a simple tuning that disables automated delivery/updates and then consider advanced tunings in future releases. The exact structure of where this tuning belongs on the HCO API is left up to the HCO community.
```
Can we put the focus of this as on-by-default? I can see why most users would not like this machinery running, but I think that most users would prefer to have the most up-to-date base image on their cluster.

Author: @dankenigsberg during an update, turning disk delivery on by default will clobber usage of existing disks someone may have uploaded. That's why this is an opt-in feature. 

Think of the scenario where someone has strategically picked/uploaded the centos8 image they expect everyone to use as a base image, they update the HCO, then the centos8 base image all their templates use changes without them having any knowledge of this.

Author: the PR has now been merged, we can still continue this discussion point though if you'd like.
